The results of this study demonstrate that in the very early stages of the Covid-19 pandemic in the United States, counties with higher overall poverty (as reflected in the poverty index) had larger numbers of confirmed cases than did relatively more affluent counties. This trend changed over time. Through the months of February and March, 2020 there were more confirmed cases of the virus in poorer counties, but by April 1, 2020 the relationship had shifted so that the number of confirmed Covid-19 cases was greater in relatively less poor counties. When examining the relationships between specific facets of poverty and the number of confirmed Covid-19 cases, the results of this study demonstrated similar patterns for the percent of residents living in poverty and deep poverty, the social mobility index, life expectancy, percent low birth weight, and urban counties. Namely, early in the pandemic counties with higher rates of poverty, and deep poverty, as well as those with less social mobility, lower life expectancy, a higher percent of low birth weight babies, and more urban counties had greater numbers of confirmed Covid-19 cases, but this trend shifted by April 1, 2020 in much the same manner as for the overall poverty index.  Results for the number of deaths confirmed to be caused by Covid-19 demonstrated a pattern whereby the number of deaths was greater in areas of relatively greater poverty later in the pandemic. Furthermore, a larger number of deaths was associated with a larger percent of county residents living in poverty, living in deep poverty, a higher incidence of low weight births, and with the county being designated as urban. These trends were more pronounced on April 1, 2020 than in March. The estimated progression of the disease from infection to death of 16.1 days (Sanche et al., 2020) supports the temporal pattern of results for confirmed Covid-19 deaths and number of cases identified in this study. In short, individuals in relatively poor counties who were confirmed to have the virus in early to mid-March, 2020 would begin to die in late March and early April, given the mean 16.1 day period from infection to death, assuming that the presence of the virus was detected relatively early. However, it is also important to note that in some areas, testing was reserved for individuals who showed clear symptoms of Covid-19, and who thus may have had a relatively advanced illness. In such cases, the time between diagnosis and death could be much shorter.  Of particular interest in the current study was the relationship between poverty and the susceptibility of communities to contracting and dying from Covid-19. One somewhat unexpected result of this study was the apparent change over time in the relationship between poverty and the number of confirmed Covid-19 cases. There are a number of possible explanations that could be responsible for this shift. Certainly one possibility is that the disease simply became relatively less prevalent in these counties over time. Under that scenario, poor urban areas would see relatively fewer cases because the virus simply did not infect residents in those areas to the same extent that it did in relatively more affluent less urban communities. While certainly a theoretical possibility, evidence from the public health literature would suggest that the Covid-19 virus is highly infectious with a median R0 value of 5.7 (Sanche et al., 2020). This high level of contagion would suggest that within any community, the likelihood of the infection rate slowing down (even relatively) of its own accord this quickly seems unlikely.  A second possible explanation for the results presented above is that mitigation efforts such as sheltering in place and physical distancing had the desired effect more strongly in poorer, more urban counties than in relatively more affluent areas. However, there is some evidence that many jobs deemed to be essential, such as sanitation workers, operators of public transportation, and grocery store employees are relatively less well paid than those individuals who can work from home (Gray and Moore, 2020). In addition, lower income urban residents are more likely to use public transportation (Rachele et al., 2015), where exposure to the Covid-19 virus is more likely than would be the case in a private vehicle. Thus, while the possibility that mitigation efforts have been more effective in lower income more urban areas, there is some evidence to suggest that this may not in fact be the case.  A third possible explanation for the results presented above is that the limited testing resources available in the United States were diverted to relatively more affluent counties as the pandemic took hold in the nation. Prior research has shown that testing and treatment for influenza is relatively less available in less affluent communities (Ompad et al., 2007; Logan, 2009). Furthermore, preliminary findings reported by the Lerner Center for Public Health Promotion at Syracuse University (Monnat and Cheng, 2020) indicate that testing rates are lower in states with more black and poor residents. These findings, coupled with the acute shortage of tests that has beleaguered the entire American health care system from the beginning of the pandemic, would suggest the possibility of testing resources being less available in under-resourced communities compared to those with more financial means. Anecdotal reports in the news, while by no means definitive, do suggest a continuing serious Covid-19 problem in urban areas. Thus, it is possible that the trends evident early in the pandemic, in which more urban, less affluent counties had higher rates of Covid-19 cases, may actually be continuing but that testing resources are no longer available to confirm that the illnesses are in fact caused by the virus. This situation is exacerbated when individuals do not go the hospital when needed for fear of Covid-19 exposure while there, and by the fact that post-mortem testing is not done when individuals die at home, even when the symptoms at death would suggest the possibility of it being due to coronavirus (CNBC, 2020; New York Times, 2020).
